$ tsx scripts/chunk-preview.ts --work 'logic of hegel' --sample 10
# The Logic of Hegel (hegel) — strategy: treatise
288 passages | tokens min 20 / p50 1065 / p90 1187 / max 1442 | mean 999

─── passage 0 · 140 tokens · NOTE ───
The present volume contains a translation, which has been revised
throughout and compared with the original, of the Logic as given in the
first part of Hegel's _Encyclopaedia,_ preceded by a bibliographical
account of the three editions and extracts from the prefaces of that
work, and followed by notes and illustrations of a philological rather
than a philosophical character on the text. This introductory chapter
and these notes were not included in the previous edition.

The volume containing my Prolegomena is under revision and will be
issued shortly.

─── passage 28 · 1189 tokens · INTRODUCTION. ───
13.] Stated in exact terms, such is the origin and development of
philosophy. But the History of Philosophy gives us the same process
from an historical and external point of view. The stages in the
evolution of the Idea there seem to follow each other by accident, and
to present merely a number of different and unconnected principles,
which the several systems of philosophy carry out in their own way.
But it is not so. For these thousands of years the same Architect has
directed the work: and that Architect is the one living Mind whose
nature is to think, to bring to self-consciousness what i […]

─── passage 56 · 908 tokens · FIRST ATTITUDE OF THOUGHT TO OBJECTIVITY. ───
28.] The first of these attitudes of thought is seen in the method
which has no doubts and no sense of the contradiction in thought, or of
the hostility of thought against itself. It entertains an unquestioning
belief that reflection is the means of ascertaining the truth, and of
bringing the objects before the mind as they really are. And in this
belief it advances straight upon its objects, takes the materials
furnished by sense and perception, and reproduces them from itself as
facts of thought; and then, believing this result to be the truth, the
method is content. Philosophy in its earlie […]

─── passage 84 · 1350 tokens · SECOND ATTITUDE OF THOUGHT TO OBJECTIVITY. ───
Both on general grounds, and in the particular case, there are two
remarks to be made upon the criticism of this exaltation in thought.
The first remark deals with the question of form. When the exaltation
is exhibited in a syllogistic process, in the shape of what we call
_proofs_ of the being of God, these reasonings cannot but start from
some sort of theory of the world, which makes it an aggregate either
of contingent facts or of final causes and relations involving design.
The merely syllogistic thinker may deem this starting-point a solid
basis and suppose that it remains throughout in t […]

─── passage 112 · 1133 tokens · LOGIC FURTHER DEFINED AND DIVIDED. ───
(2) Scepticism should not be looked upon merely as a doctrine of doubt.
It would be more correct to say that the Sceptic has no doubt of his
point, which is the nothingness of all finite existence. He who only
doubts still clings to the hope that his doubt may be resolved, and
that one or other of the definite views, between which he wavers,
will turn out solid and true. Scepticism properly so called is a
very different thing: it is complete hopelessness about all which
understanding counts stable, and the feeling to which it gives birth
is one of unbroken calmness and inward repose. Such at l […]

─── passage 140 · 901 tokens · B.--QUANTITY. ───
    Ich häufe ungeheure Zahlen,
    Gebirge Millionen auf,
    Ich sesse Zeit auf Zeit
    Und Welt auf Welt zu Hauf,
    Und wenn ich von der grausen Höh'
    Mit Schwindel wieder nach Dir seh:
    Ist alle Macht der Zahl,
    Vermehrt zu Tausendmal,
    Noch nicht ein Theil von Dir.

[I heap up monstrous numbers, mountains of millions; I pile time upon
time, and world on the top of world; and when from the awful height I
cast a dizzy look towards Thee, all the power of number, multiplied a
thousand times, is not yet one part of Thee.]

Here then we meet, in the first place, that continual ex […]

─── passage 168 · 412 tokens · A.--ESSENCE AS GROUND OF EXISTENCE. ───
The negation of the several matters, which is insisted on in the
thing no less than their independent existence, occurs in Physics as
_porosity._ Each of the several matters (colouring matter, odorific
matter, and if we believe some people, even sound-matter,--not
excluding caloric, electric matter, &c:) is also negated: and in this
negation of theirs, or as interpenetrating their pores, we find the
numerous other independent matters, which, being similarly porous,
make room in turn for the existence of the rest. Pores are not
empirical facts; they are figments of the understanding, which uses […]

─── passage 196 · 1192 tokens · C.--ACTUALITY. ───
The shortcoming thus acknowledged to attach to the content turns out
at the same time to be a shortcoming in respect of form. Spinoza puts
substance at the head of his system, and defines it to be the unity
of thought and extension, without demonstrating how he gets to this
distinction, or how he traces it back to the unity of substance. The
further treatment of the subject proceeds in what is called the
mathematical method. Definitions and axioms are first laid down: after
them comes a series of theorems, which are proved by an analytical
reduction of them to these unproved postulates. Althou […]

─── passage 224 · 1139 tokens · A.--THE SUBJECTIVE NOTION. ───
191.] The Syllogism of Necessity, if we look to its purely abstract
characteristics or terms, has for its mean the Universal in the same
way as the Syllogism of Reflection has the Individual, the latter
being in the second, and the former in the third figure (§ 187).
The Universal is expressly put as in its very nature intrinsically
determinate. In the first place (1) the Particular, meaning by the
particular the specific genus or species, is the term for mediating
the extremes--as is done in the Categorical syllogism. (2) The
same office is performed by the Individual, taking the individual a […]

─── passage 252 · 986 tokens · C.--THE IDEA. ───
The Absolute Idea is, in the first place, the unity of the theoretical
and practical idea, and thus at the same time the unity of the idea
of life with the idea of cognition. In cognition we had the idea in a
biassed, one-sided shape. The process of cognition has issued in the
overthrow of this bias and the restoration of that unity, which as
unity, and in its immediacy, is in the first instance the Idea of Life.
The defect of life lies in its being only the idea implicit or natural:
whereas cognition is in an equally one-sided way the merely conscious
idea, or the idea for itself. The unity a […]
